Article discussing thread safety in Azure SDK objects … (#24365)
dotnet/docs: docs/azure/sdk/thread-safety.md

---
title: Thread safety with the Azure SDK for .NET

> description: This article discusses how Azure SDK client objects are designed to be thread safe and how this design impacts client lifetime management (client objects can be singletons) and why it is unnecessary to dispose of SDK client objects after using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about thread safety in Azure SDK client objects and how this design impacts client lifetime management.
```

ms.date: 05/24/2021
ms.author: pakrym
author: pakrym
---

# Thread safety and client lifetime management for Azure SDK objects

> This article is designed to help you understand thread safety issues when using the Azure SDK. It also discusses how the design of the SDK impacts client lifetime management and why it's unnecessary to dispose of Azure SDK client objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article helps you understand thread safety issues when using the Azure SDK. It also discusses how the design of the SDK impacts client lifetime management. You'll learn why it's unnecessary to dispose of Azure SDK client objects.
```

## Thread safety

All Azure SDK client objects are thread-safe and independent of each other. This design ensures that reusing client instances is always safe, even across threads. For example, the following code launches multiple tasks but is thread safe:

```csharp

> var client = new SecretClient(new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());

Reviewer: Wrap this line to prevent horizontal scrolling in docs.

```suggestion
var client = new SecretClient(
    new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());
```

> All Azure SDK client objects are thread-safe and independent of each other. This ensures that reusing client instances is always safe, even across threads. For example, the following code launches multiple tasks but is thread safe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Azure SDK client objects are thread-safe and independent of each other. This design ensures that reusing client instances is always safe, even across threads. For example, the following code launches multiple tasks but is thread safe:
```

foreach (var secretName in secretNames)
{
    // Using clients from parallel threads
    Task.Run(() => Console.WriteLine(client.GetSecret(secretName).Value));
}
```

> Model objects used by SDK clients, whether input or output models, are *not* thread-safe by default. Most use cases involving model objects only involve a single thread, making the cost of implementing synchronization as a default behavior too high for these objects. The following sample illustrates a bug where accessing a model from multiple threads could cause an undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model objects used by SDK clients, whether input or output models, aren't thread-safe by default. Most use cases involving model objects only use a single thread. Therefore, the cost of implementing synchronization as a default behavior is too high for these objects. The following code illustrates a bug in which accessing a model from multiple threads could cause an undefined behavior:
```

```csharp
KeyVaultSecret newSecret = client.SetSecret("secret", "value");

foreach (var tag in tags)
{
    // Don't use model type from parallel threads
    Task.Run(() => newSecret.Properties.Tags[tag] = CalculateTagValue(tag));
}

client.UpdateSecretProperties(newSecret.Properties);

> 

Reviewer: Remove this blank line.

```suggestion
```

```

> If you need to access the model from different threads, you must implement your own synchronization code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access the model from different threads, you must implement your own synchronization code. For example:
```

```csharp
KeyVaultSecret newSecret = client.SetSecret("secret", "value");

foreach (var tag in tags)
{
    Task.Run(() =>
    {
        lock (newSecret)
        {
            newSecret.Properties.Tags[tag] = CalculateTagValue(tag);
        }
    );
}

client.UpdateSecretProperties(newSecret.Properties);
```

> ## Client Lifetime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Client lifetime
```

> Because Azure SDK clients are thread-safe, there is no reason to construct multiple SDK client objects for a given set of constructor parameters. Therefore, you should treat Azure SDK client objects as singletons once constructed.  This is most commonly implemented by registering Azure SDK client objects as singletons in the application's IoC container and using dependency injection to pass out references to the SDK client object.  The following example shows how this is done in an ASP.NET Core application with the built-in IoC container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Azure SDK clients are thread-safe, there's no reason to construct multiple SDK client objects for a given set of constructor parameters. Therefore, you should treat Azure SDK client objects as singletons once constructed. This is most commonly implemented by registering Azure SDK client objects as singletons in the app's Inversion of Control (IoC) container and using dependency injection (DI) to obtain references to the SDK client object. The following example shows how this is done in an ASP.NET Core app with the built-in IoC container.
```

```csharp
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    services.AddControllersWithViews();

>     var blobServiceClient = new BlobServiceClient(new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());                   

Reviewer: Wrap this line to prevent horizontal scrolling in docs.

```suggestion
    var blobServiceClient = new BlobServiceClient(
        new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());
```

```csharp
var client = new SecretClient(
    new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());

foreach (var secretName in secretNames)
{
    // Using clients from parallel threads
    Task.Run(() => Console.WriteLine(client.GetSecret(secretName).Value));
}
```

Model objects used by SDK clients, whether input or output models, are *not* thread-safe by default. Most use cases involving model objects only involve a single thread, making the cost of implementing synchronization as a default behavior too high for these objects. The following sample illustrates a bug where accessing a model from multiple threads could cause an undefined behavior.

```csharp
KeyVaultSecret newSecret = client.SetSecret("secret", "value");

foreach (var tag in tags)
{
    // Don't use model type from parallel threads
    Task.Run(() => newSecret.Properties.Tags[tag] = CalculateTagValue(tag));
}

client.UpdateSecretProperties(newSecret.Properties);
```

To access the model from different threads, you must implement your own synchronization code. For example:

```csharp
KeyVaultSecret newSecret = client.SetSecret("secret", "value");

> foreach (var tag in tags)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Code omitted for brevity

foreach (var tag in tags)
```

{
    Task.Run(() =>
    {
        lock (newSecret)
        {
            newSecret.Properties.Tags[tag] = CalculateTagValue(tag);
        }
    );
}

client.UpdateSecretProperties(newSecret.Properties);
```

## Client lifetime

> Because Azure SDK clients are thread-safe, there's no reason to construct multiple SDK client objects for a given set of constructor parameters. Therefore, you should treat Azure SDK client objects as singletons once constructed. This is most commonly implemented by registering Azure SDK client objects as singletons in the app's Inversion of Control (IoC) container and using dependency injection (DI) to obtain references to the SDK client object. The following example shows how this is done in an ASP.NET Core app with the built-in IoC container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Azure SDK clients are thread-safe, there's no reason to construct multiple SDK client objects for a given set of constructor parameters. Treat Azure SDK client objects as singletons once constructed. This recommendation is commonly implemented by registering Azure SDK client objects as singletons in the app's Inversion of Control (IoC) container. Dependency injection (DI) is used to obtain references to the SDK client object. The following example shows a singleton client object registration in an ASP.NET Core app's `Startup.ConfigureServices` method:
```

```csharp
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    services.AddControllersWithViews();

    var blobServiceClient = new BlobServiceClient(
        new Uri("<secrets_endpoint>"), new DefaultAzureCredential());
    services.AddSingleton(blobServiceClient);
          
    // Code omitted for brevity
}
```

For more information about implementing DI with the Azure SDK, see [Dependency injection with the Azure .NET SDK](./dependency-injection.md).

> Alternatively, you may also create an SDK client instance and pass it as a parameter to methods that require a client. The point is to avoid unnecessary instantiations of the same SDK client object with the same parameters, as it's unnecessary and wasteful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you may create an SDK client instance and provide it to methods that require a client. The point is to avoid unnecessary instantiations of the same SDK client object with the same parameters. It's both unnecessary and wasteful.
```

## Clients aren't disposable

Two final questions that often come up are:

* Do I need to dispose of Azure SDK client objects when I'm finished using them?
* Why aren't HTTP-based Azure SDK client objects disposable?

Internally, all Azure SDK clients use a single shared `HttpClient` instance. The clients don't create any other resources that need to be actively freed. The shared `HttpClient` instance persists throughout the entire application lifetime.

```csharp
// Both clients reuse the shared HttpClient and don't need to be disposed
var blobClient = new BlobClient(new Uri(sasUri));
var blobClient2 = new BlobClient(new Uri(sasUri2));
```

It's possible to provide a custom instance of `HttpClient` to an Azure SDK client object. In this case, you become responsible for managing the `HttpClient` lifetime and properly disposing of it at the right time.

```csharp
var httpClient = new HttpClient();

var clientOptions = new BlobClientOptions()
{
    Transport = new HttpClientTransport(httpClient)

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
};
```

> // Both client would use the HttpClient instance provided in clientOptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Both clients would use the HttpClient instance provided in clientOptions
```

var blobClient = new BlobClient(new Uri(sasUri), clientOptions);
var blobClient2 = new BlobClient(new Uri(sasUri2), clientOptions);

> // ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Code omitted for brevity
```

> // you are responsible for properly disposing httpClient some time later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// You're responsible for properly disposing httpClient some time later
```
